Microradiographyand light microscopy of mineralization in the pulp of undemineralized human primary molars
Arys A, Philippart C, Dourov N; Microradiogiaphy and light microscopy of mineralization in the pulp of undetninetalized human pritnary molars. J
Oral Pathol Med 1993; 22; 49-53. iC- Munksgantd 1993.
This study was undertaken to investigate the prevalence, location and histologic- features of the different types of mineralization observed in the pulp of human primary tnolars. Microradiography and light microscopy of undetninetalized material disclosed that 95% of ptiinary molars contain pulp calcifications. Histologically, their structure may be classified into four diiTerent types; (1) pulp stones, (2) diffuse calcifications, (3) ebumoid tissue and (4) .spherulitic calcifications.
Numerous studies have provided data showing the high occurrence of pulp calcifications in patients over 10 years old (1-3). However the majority of these have teported on the prevalence and his­tologic features of pulp calcifications found in permanent human teeth exam­ined after detnineralization.
Until recently the literature failed to disclose any information on the prev­alence, location, histologic nature and ultrastructute of calcifications in the pulp of the pritnary dentition. Pulp calcifications in primary teeth have been studied only by light tnicroscopy (4, 5). They have been classified \<s false or true denticles, free or attached to the dentinal wall, and as diffuse calcifica­tions (5),
The purpose of this investigation was to study, by tnicrotadiogtaphic analysis and light microscopy of uiidemincralized material, the prevalence and nature of ptilp calcifications affecting human primary molats.
Material and methods
Primary molars were obtained fresh from extractions for orthodontic pur­poses from 42 healthy children of both sexes, aged 5 to 13 years.
They were immediately fixed in 10% formalin. Twenty-three carious non-treated teeth, 14 tteated with amalgatn fillings and 5 caries-free primary molars were select­ed, having less than one third of their roots resorbed.
After immersion in tnethanol for de­hydration, iti chlorofonn for defatting, and in toluene for clearing, the molars were finally embedded in methyl meth­acrylate (6). Sections 120 nm thick were prepared using an automatic saw with a diamond disc (type 32,
Safag, Bienne, Switzerland). Each section was reduced to a uniform thickness of 80 (im by man­ual grinding on a ground glass plate under methanol. A micrograph of the sections was taken on a fine grain Ko­dak .spectroscopic plate 649.0, exposed to long wavelength x-radiations pro­duced by a Machlett tube with a tung­sten anode and I mm thick beryllium window (Baltograph BF 5020, Liege, Belgium). The exposure at 13 kV and 18 mA lasted 15 min for a film focus distance of 61 mm. In order to complete the microradiographic observations, the undemineralized sections were stained with methylene blue (0.5% pH 4,3),
The samples were mounted and studied under natural or polarized light.
Histo­logic observations were made on an average of 10 non-demineralized slices per tooth.
**Results**
Histologically, four different types of mineralization were observed in the dental pulps. They were identified as free and attached pulp stones (1), dif­fuse calcifications (2), ebumoVd tissue (3) and spherulitic calcifications (4).
Ninety-five percent of the molars ex­amined contained pulp calcifications. The prevalences of the four different types of mineralized material in primary molars are summarised in Fig. 1, and their relative frequency of occurrence is shown in Fig. 2. The percentages of teeth with pulpal calcifications were correlated with different parameters such as age, sex, treatments and prefer­ential localization in the pulp (Table 1 4, Fig. 3). The microradiographic prevalence of pulpal calcifications was closely similar for males and females, as well as for maxillary and mandibular molars, and for first and second molars. In the treated group, the percentage of teeth showing pulp calcifications was lower than in the non-treated molars (Fig- 4).
*Pulp stones* were contained in 33 *(lH\'7i\<)* of the molars (Fig. 1).
They were masses of calcified bodies showing ho­mogeneous radiopacity, or hetero­geneous globular structures of highly mineralized material generally more *Mineratiz(ttion inpritnarv toothpulp* 51 erally, the spherulites were fomied by the association of rhombic crystals con­verging towards a radiolucent center. In some cases the crystals were tightly packed, disclosing a fine radial pattern (Fig.
 9A, B). The polarized light exami­nation *of* the corresponding undem­ineralized ground sections showed bire­fringence and a striped pattern in the spherulites. The micrographs showed that the spherulites contained nutnerous pyknotic nuclei (Fig. *9C).* **Discussion**
In the microradiographic study, thick .serial sections were made (120 (.itn), then reduced to 9D \|,iin. Thus a large fraction of the pulp area was not examined. This method does not lend itself to an accu­rate statistical survey of the prevalence of pulp calcifications.
Nevertheless, we attempted to assess the occurrence in the pulp of one or the other types of inincr;ili/cd tissue by histologic observa­tion of an average of 10 non-demtneral- i/ed slices per tooth. We noted the inimber of teeth containing each type of pulp mineralization. In this way, the total number of positive observations provided an evaluation of the represen­tation of the dilTerent types of microeal- cifications in the pulp and of their rela­tive occurrence in the dilTerent molar groups.
However, as interpretation of the results is limited by the histologic nature of the inquiry, they have not been submitted to statistical tests.
In our findings almost all pritnary molars (95\" o) contained pulp calcifica­tions. The prevalence is many times higher than that usually described in the literature based only on histological studies (5, 6).
This dilTerence may be explained by the use of non-demineral- i7ed ground sections, which are sup­posed to preserve most of the calcified loci revealed by microradiography of the samples.
Studying 120 primary teeth, YAA- fOR & HAMtt) (5) reported that pulpal calcifications increase with age and that the presence of caries did not have any significant influence.
In contrast we found that age does not have any influence. On the other hand the occurrence of pulpal calcifica- calcifications: pulp stoned (PS), difluse calcifications (DC), ebumoid tissue (ET) and spherulitic calcifications (S). The most common type encountcted in our material was fiee or attached pulp stones, whereas YAACoti & HAMtt) (5) reported that difluse calcifications oc­cur more frequently.
According to their structure, pulp stones have customarily been classified as false and true denticles. The true den­ticles contain dentinal tubules whereas the false are described as atubular bodies (3, 7 13), These latter have tormcd us the result of concentric lami­nated deposits arouinl iniiuite loci of calcified tissue.
In our material, however, the calcified masses formed of incremental layers of concentric deposits were cotnposed of irregular microscopic tubules. Our ob­servations show that there is no evi­dence that they are true dentinal tu­bules. In agreement with sotne authors (14 16) who have studied pulp calcifica­tions either in pemiaiient or in primary dentitions, we find that the distinction between the two types of denticles is inappropriate.
Moreover, histologic findings con­cerning etnbedded ptilp stones strotigly suggest that they arc formed in isolation frotn dentinogenesis and are surround­ed by a growing dentinal mineral front (17).
Pulps that contain pulp stones usual­ly exhibit difluse calcifications as well. Difluse deposits of mineral may first occur independently throughout the pulp. In sotne instances they tnay later coalesce into compact pulp stones. In our view, however, this process excltides the fortnatioti of the more complex forms of pttip stones which have grown by the addition of calcified tnaterial, in­cluding tnicroscopic tubular structures ;irrangcd with a general concentric pattern as indicated by polari/ed light microscopy.
Extensive masses of calcified tissues resembling fibrodentin or osteodentin were found in contact with the Hoor and roof of the pulp chamber. This tissue was thought to be laid down in associa­tion with the resorption process (7, 18, 19). The deposition of concentric or amorphous, tubtilar or atubular calci­fied material, extending lar fnnn the re­pair areas, leads to massive obliteration of the pulp chamber. We propose to call that deposit \"ebumoid tissue\", by reference to the tissue described by Ftsn (20), It is unlikely that this material re-
Heets degenerative ehanges in the pulpal mesenchyme. Its lorniatioii appears to reflect the potential existing in the pulp cells to form primitive types ol denlin.
The spheruiitic calcifications discov­ered by scanning electron microscopy and by microradiography (17) cannot be classified according to llie tr;Klition;il classification systems. The mcclianisni leading to the deposition of mineral in a spheruiitic pattern in the pulp is un­known (21). Histologic and crystallo­graphic sttidics concerning the composi­tion ol the niiiicral phases of the spheru­lites revealed that well-crystalli/cd brushite is the major compound (21. 22) and that they have a close relationship with innammatory cells and degenerat­ing tissues (23).