Comparative Physicochemical Analysis of Pulp Stone and Dentin
Fleur Beres, DDS, MPhil, \* Juliane Isaac, MPhil, PhD, Ludovic Mouton,
PhD,
Stephan Rouziere, PhD, Ariane Berdal, DDS, MPhil, PhD, \*\*
Stephane Simon, DDS, MPhil, PhD, \*\*\* and Arnaud Dessombz, MPhil,
PhD\*\* Dental pulp and dentin act as a single physiological unit usually named the dentin­pulp complex. At the periphery of the dental pulp, dentinogenesis is the main biological activity of the odontoblasts, which are also mechanosensitive and immuno­competent cells (1).
 Odontoblasts are postmitotic cells but remain active throughout their lifetime. Odontoblasts secrete primary dentin during early tooth development, and this creates the first pattern of the tooth. When the tooth becomes functional, sec­ondary dentinogenesis replaces primary dentinogenesis as the same odontoblasts secrete dentin at a lower rate (2).

Tertiary dentinogenesis is a third process mediated by odontoblasts and may be categorized into 2 types, reactionary and reparative.
 Reactionary dentinogenesis is the process whereby dentin is secreted in response to a local stimulus that reactivates the resting odontoblasts (3). Reparative dentinogenesis occurs when odontoblast cells die, thus initiating a complex regenerative process that allows the formation of repar­ative dentin after recruitment of progenitor cells, their differentiation into odontoblast­like cells, and activation of mineralized tissue secretion. These 2 types of pulp responses are quite well-described (4).

In addition to dentinogenesis in its varied forms, the occurrence of central pulpal calcifications has been reported in several clinical observational studies (5). Pulp stones are usually clinically identified on routine radiographic examination and in close association with deep restorations or repeated mild tooth injury over time. The frequency of occurrence of such calcifications is unclear.
 Reported rates vary from 4% (6) to 78% (7). It is commonly accepted that at least 50% of all teeth present 1 or more mineralized stones (8). Pulp stones have been observed in the dental pulp in all age groups, albeit with increased frequency in older age groups and insulted pulps (9).

The etiologic factors in pulp calcification formation are not well-understood. Several mechanisms have been proposed (8).
 Calcifications may develop around an area of damaged pulp tissue (eg, degenerating cells, blood thrombi, or collagen fibrils). Calcium phosphate crystals may also be deposited within the mineralizing cells. Calci­fications replace the normal components of the pulp and might generate an inflamma­tory environment (8).

Different forms of pulp stones can be found: entrapped, adherent, or free within the pulp tissue (10). Their diameters vary from 50 q.m to several millimeters (11). These calcifications may fully seal the pulp chamber volume and thereby complicate endodontic treatment. The calcifications are described as true (resembling dentin), false (composed of localized masses of calcified material), or diffuse (often found
From the \*Univ Paris 07, Univ Paris 06, Univ Paris 05, Equipe Berdal,
Unites Mixtes Rech 11, Ctr Rech Cordeliers, INSERM, Lab Physiopathol
Orale, Paris; UFR dOdontologie, Paris Descartes University, Paris; \*UFR dOdontologie, Paris Diderot University, Paris; laboratory of
Morphogenesis Molecular Genetics, Department of Developmental and Stem
Cells Biology, Institut Pasteur, CNRS URA 2578, Paris; ITODYS, UMR 7086 CNRS, Paris Diderot University, Sorbonne Paris Cite, Paris; Laboratoire de Physique des Solides, Paris-Sud University, CNRS, UMR 8502, Orsay, France; and #Hopital de la Pitie Salpetriere, Service dOdontologie, Paris, France.
Address requests for reprints to Dr Stephane Simon, UFR dOdontologie, 5 rue de Garanciere, 75006 Paris, France E-mail address: <simendo@gmail.com> 0099-2399/S - see front matter Copyright &copy; 2016
Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of American Association of
Endodontists.
<<http://dx.doi.Org/10.1016/j.joen> .2015.11.007 near blood vessels) (12). Their mineral phase consists of typical carbonated hydroxyapatites (13); however, their precise composition has never been established (14).
More knowledge on the crystallographic structure and physico­chemical composition of pulp stones would contribute to a better un­derstanding of their formation and the pathogenesis of pulp calcifications. In normal and ectopic mineralizations, the accuracy of physicochemical analysis has been demonstrated (15-18). The present study aimed to provide a detailed comparative description of the mineral phase that is in the pulpal calcification. To this end we used x-ray diffraction (XRD) and x-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometry and compared the mineral composition of pulp stones with their ultrastructure by using healthy (19, 20) and carious dentin (21) of the same teeth as references.

## **Materials and Methods**


Collection of Samples **Healthy and Carious Dentin.** Human freshly extracted perma­nent molars were obtained from patients requiring extractions after consulting in the emergency department (Hopital de la Pitie Salpetriere). Selected teeth were unrestored but presented carious dis­eases with either occlusal or proximal active lesions. A carious zone and a healthy zone (free from caries) were isolated from each specimen. Caries involving more than half of the crown dentin (on a periapical radiograph) were excluded from the study. Eight teeth were selected from 8 different patients (3 women and 5 men, aged 20-73 years).
**Pulpal Calcifications.** Pulp stones were retrieved from teeth scheduled for endodontic treatment. In total, 6 pulpal calcifications had sizes ranging from 1.2 mm to 2.5 mm (mean size, 1.7 mm ± 0.4 mm).
They were obtained from 5 patients (3 women and 2 men, aged 37-68 years).
Human sample collection complied with the Helsinki Declaration.
According to French law on human research (Law 2007-1110, article 1211-2), tooth and pulpal sample collection (surgical waste) is al­lowed unless a patient objects; all patients were informed of the use of the samples and gave their consent.
**Preparation of Samples.** After collection, specimens were gently cleaned, and exogenous material was removed. Samples were rinsed with a phosphate-buffered safine solution at pH 7.4 (Invitrogen, Carls­bad, CA) and fixed with 4% formaldehyde in the same phosphate- buffered saline buffer (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA). Samples were then dehydrated in a graded series of ethanol solutions (75% for 2 days, 90% for 2 days, and 100% for 2 more days). Samples were embedded into light-cured acrylate-resin (Technovit 7200 VLC; Heraeus Kulzer, Hanau,
Germany) or not (for surface characteriza­tion).
Blocks were cut into 150-m-thick slices by using a low-speed diamond saw (Isomet Low Speed Cutter; Buehler, Düsseldorf, Germany) under constant water irrigation. Surfaces of samples were polished by using increasing grit polisher disks.
Scanning Electron Microscopy
Each sample was sputter-coated with a 5-nm layer of platinum (SC7640 sputter coater; Quorum Technologies, Guelph, ON, Canada). A SUPRA 40 scanning electron microscope (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) was used to observe the microstructure. This field-effect gun microscope operates at 0.5-30 kV. Observations were made by us­ing an Everhart-Thornley secondary electron (SE) detector at 5 keV. Polished section samples were observed with a backscattering electron (BSE) detector at 15 keV.
Energy-dispersive Spectroscopy
Sputter-coated samples were prepared. Imaging and microanal­ysis were performed on an SU-70 Hitachi SEM-FEG (Tokyo, Japan) and an X-Max 50 mm Oxford EDX (Oxford Instruments, Concord, MA) detector.
X-ray Diffraction
Phase identification and crystallinity of the dental mineral part were evaluated by XRD. Experiments were carried out with a molybde­num rotating anode x-ray generator (Rigaku RU-H2R; Rigaku, Tokyo, Japan) coupled with multilayer W/Si optics delivering a focalized and monochromated (A = 0.711 A) x-ray beam of 800 /xm x 1 mm size onto the sample. X-ray images were recorded with a MAR345 (@MAR Research,
Hamburg, Germany) detector placed at a distance of 200 mm from the sample. Acquisition time for each measurement was 30 minutes.
Diffraction diagrams were obtained by processing radial intensity integration of each image, and then the positions of the diffraction peaks were compared with reference files from the Joint Committee on
Powder Diffraction Standards database.
X-ray Fluorescence
XRF allows precise determination of the elemental composition of the sample. Experiments were carried out with a molybdenum rotating anode x-ray generator (Rigaku RU200) coupled with multilayer W/Si optics delivering a focalized and monochromated (A = 0.711 A) x-ray beam of 150 m x 150 gm size. Fluorescence spectra were measured with an energy-dispersive detector (SDD detector \@Ketek), with a time acquisition of 1500 seconds each. XRF analysis was per­formed with PyMca software (22).
Statistical Analysis
Statistical comparisons were made by using the Wilcoxon-Mann- Whitney test (GraphPad Prism, Lajolla, CA). Data are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation.
Results
Representative scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the samples are shown in Figure 1, which were obtained by using the SE (Fig. L4 and#) and BSE modes (Fig. *1C-F).* Pulp stones dis­played a heterogeneous structure with smooth and regular surfaces (Fig. L4). At high magnification, spherical calcifications of various sizes were identified on the surface, which could be elementary struc­tures capable of aggregating and forming a stone core (Fig. IB). In sections, the chemical structure was highly heterogeneous, showing alternating dark and fight areas (Fig. 1C). The higher electron back- scattering coefficient of the fight areas indicates they are either composed of heavier chemical elements or more mineralized than the darker areas.
Tubular areas were evident in regions sparse in pulp stones, suggesting the existence of tubular dentin-like matter (high magnification of blue box) (Fig. ID). In other areas, concentric structures were formed by successive layers of material of different electron densities (Fig.
*IE),* showing a disorganized matrix pattern (high magnification of red box) (Fig. IB). Localization of heavy ele­ments was also performed by using energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) (Fig. *1G* and *H).* Zn (at energy of 8.63 keV) was detected in the core of pulp stones. The fight areas previously mentioned did not show any significant signal of trace elements (eg, points 2, 3, and 6). The Pt peaks were induced by sputter-coating.
Two-dimensional XRD patterns for healthy dentin (Fig. *2A),* carious dentin (Fig. 2B), and pulp stone (Fig. *2C)* are illustrated in Energy (keV) **Figure 1.** SEM images (4 and *B,* SE; *C-G,* BSE). (4) Pulp stone (scale bar = 500 /im); *(B)* higher magnification of pulp stone surface (scale bar = 50 /rm); *(C)* pulp stone section (scale bar = 500 /rm); *(D-F)* higher magnifications of section detail: tubular structures in *blue boxed area (D)* (scale bar = 5 M); concentric structures (£) (scale bar = 500 /rm) and *red. boxed, area (F)* (scale bar = 10 /rm); *(G)* pulp stone section (scale bar =1 mm) with measured points by EDS; (//) EDS spectra of points of interest. Only points 1-4-5 provide significant Zn peak at 8.63 keV. Peaks at 8.40 keV and 9-45 keV are attributed to Pt (La-M) and Pt LI, respectively.
Figure 2. Diffraction diagrams of the 3 samples showed similar Debye ring patterns. Phase identification was performed by comparison with reference data (Joint Committee on Powder Diffraction Standards 9­432) and led to the identification of partially carbonated apatite. XRD diagrams (Fig. *W)* were similar in the healthy dentin, carious dentin, and pulp stone samples, with only some minor differences in peak in­tensities and width. No texture could be noted, which indicates that no preferential crystalline orientation exists in these samples.
However, the shoulder marked with an asterisk (at 2-theta = 26.78°) in the pulp stone sample suggests a modified crystallite morphology and variation along (202) the crystallographic direction. Each ring was quite intense and thin, indicative of high crystallinity. Diffuse halos at small angles can be seen, but they were not considered further because they are pre­sumed to have been caused by diffusion of the acrylate resin.
**Figure 2.** Two-dimensional XRD patterns. (A) Healthy dentin, (B) carious dentin, *(C)* pulp stone. *(D)* Diffraction diagram obtained by radial intensity integration of the diffraction image of (A), *(B),* and (C). Shoulder *(asterisk)* is attributed to the (202) crystallographic direction.
XRF spectra identified P, Ca, Cu, Zn, and Sr within dentin and pulp stones (Fig. 3). The presence of Ca and P further supports that the mineral phase is a calcium phosphate, in accordance with the XRD results shown in Figure 2. As observed here, Sr is also commonly found in biological apatite as a substitute for Ca (23). Contributions of Zn and
Cu (Fig. 3, inset) varied depending on the dentin site and status; they were higher in pulp stones and carious dentin than in healthy dentin.
Comparisons of mineral composition between samples were per­formed by calculating their respective elemental ratios (Fig. 4). The XRD experiments showed that the mineral phase in each sample was apatite. Ca was used as an internal reference element to compare the composition of the trace elements Cu and Zn. Each XRF spectrum was analyzed with PyMCA software to obtain the area under the fluores­cence peak curve (AUC) of each identified element. AUCs of each element of interest were divided by the AUC value of Ca. Mean values of each ratio for all samples are shown with the standard deviation in Figure 4. Significantly higher levels of Zn were found in pulp stones and carious dentin compared with healthy dentin *(P* \< .01). Moreover, the Zn level was significantly higher in pulp stones compared with carious dentin *(P \<* .01). Whereas
Cu was almost undetectable in healthy dentin (6.7 x 10 ± 0.7 x 10, limit of detectability), it was significantly increased in both carious dentin and pulp stones *(P \<* .001, 1.7 x 10 ± 2.6 x 10 for carious dentin and 3.0 x 10 ± 1.7 x 10 for pulp stone).

## **Discussion**


Pulp stones arise as a pulp response to mild injury (9). The eti­ology of pulp calcifications has been attributed to longstanding local irritants such as caries, wasting diseases, pulp-capping procedures, healed fractures, tooth injury restorations, periodontal conditions, and orthodontic tooth movements. In young adults, pulp stone has been significantly associated with carious and/or restored teeth, sug­gesting that chronic pulp irritation might lead to pulp stone formation (24).
The other reported causes include idiopathic factors, fluoride supplements, hypervitaminosis D, or a possible genetic predisposition (dentinogenesis imperfecta and dentinal dysplasia, which may be seen even in unerupted teeth, and aging) (25). With aging, the pulp de­creases in size because of the deposition of secondary/tertiary dentin; this results in favorable conditions for development of pulpal calcifi­cations (14). Nevertheless, the correlation between aging and pulpal calcifications remains unclear and is still under discussion (11). Of note, in the present study no direct relationship between aging and **Figure 3.** XRF spectra of carious dentin, pulp stone, and sound dentin. Contributions of P (Ka = 2.013 keV), atmospheric Ar (Ka = 2.958 keV), Ca (Ka = 3.691 keV, K/5 = 4.012 keV), Cu (Ka = 8.047 keV), Zn (Ka = 8.638 keV, K/5 = 9-572 keV), and Sr (Ka = 14.165 keV). Note: peaks at 16.534 keV and 17.479 keV are Compton scattering and irradiation, respectively. *Inset,* a zoom between 7.5 keV and 10 keV, in logarithmic units.
pulp stone size and composition was noticed; however, further inves­tigation is needed to answer this question.
Although epidemiologic studies have highlighted their high preva­lence (7,9), basic knowledge of the reactionary process that gives rise to pulp stones is still missing. By using peripheral healthy and carious dentin as reference material, we undertook a physicochemical study of pulp stones to explore the clinical hypothesis that they are composed of a dentin-like substance secreted in response to repeated mild inflam­mation of the pulp.
Our XRD data indicate that apatitic structures are shared by pulp stones, carious dentin, and healthy dentin. The general shapes of the diffractograms prove the absence of significant crystallographic differ­ences, as previously reported for dentin (19, 20). Some minor differences in width and intensity that we observed suggest morphologic differences consistent with the known subtle modifications of stoichiometry in imperfect bioapatites (18). Only ap- □ Sound dentin
O Carious dentin Pulp stone **Figure 4.** Mean values of the area ratio of fluorescence peaks of Zn and Cu versus Ca for 6 samples. Areas were obtained by fitting with
MyPCA software. Each ratio shows the relative proportion of trace element (normalized by Ca). Data are presented as the mean ± standard deviation, ns, non-significant. \*\*P\< .01, \*\*\*P\< .001.
atites of rather good crystallinity were present in pulp stones. This is different from ectopic calcifications, which contain additional mineral phases (16) and apatites of altered crystallinity (17). The shape and absence of texture of the Debye ring patterns we observed for pulp stones are similar to those of dentin and bone (20).
Our SEM investigations underfined the heterogeneity of pulpal mineralization. Whereas the organization of pulp stones and dentin was similar in restricted areas, supporting the previously proposed dentin-like nature of some pulp stones (10), more encompassing ob­servations at lower magnification highlighted a true difference at the ul- trastructural level. SEM imaging evidenced globules of various sizes, which were formed by fused concentric layers of variable composition. This observation suggests the occurrence of several sites for globule initiation, followed by their progressive enlargement and ending with their fusion and entrapment of dentin-like regions within large pulp stone territories. The concentric layers we observed by
SEM-BSE are supposed to be related to mineral density and heterogeneity.
EDS anal­ysis on the brighter areas at the periphery of pulp stones showed no ev­idence of trace elements, thus supporting a higher mineral density in restricted regions of pulp stone instead of substitution of
Ca by heavy elements. Detection of Zn by EDS in the darker zones led us to investi­gate its distribution in more detail. On XRF examination, both
Zn and Cu were detected specifically in pulp stones and carious dentin.
In this respect, whereas Zn presence has already been described in dentin (19, 20, 26) and bone (27), the combined presence of Zn and Cu is a new finding (21). Our XRF data, in line with the results of Harris et al (21) on caries, confirm the presence of Zn and Cu in decayed dentin and reveal for the first time an increase in the concentration of these elements into pulp stones compared with physiological dentin.
Zn and Cu are essential trace elements for living organisms; they take part in many aspects of metabolism.
The higher concentration of elements in mineralized tissues is usu­ally attributed to their presence in 3 "compartments." Zn may be found as a free element in solution (19, 20), it may be inserted within the apatite structure, or it may be coordinately bound to several organic molecules.
Because our samples were dried before observation, the liquid phase was no longer present. Zn can substitute for no more than 5% of Ca in apatite crystal without inducing significant modifications to the lattice parameters (28), and its integration into apatite has been documented in various physiological or ectopic miner­alization processes (26, 29, 30). Previous studies have described the presence of Zn bound to metalloenzymes in bone (27) and in dentin (19, 20, 26). In fine with those previous results, the occurrence of Zn and Cu in pulp stones might be secondary to the presence of various organic components such as metalloenzymes. Among the metalloenzymes potentially present in this tissue, the concomitant increase in both trace elements Cu and Zn could account for the presence of a Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD) in an inflammatory context.
Dental caries is a multifactorial infectious disease. It is a localized, destructive, and progressive infection of dentin. When bacteria reach the dentin, they penetrate into the tubules and invade the odontoblastic cell process by diffusion (31). The pulp-healing response to carious disease has been extensively investigated and is quite well- understood.
However, pulpal responses that are not related to caries, but to additional chemical or mechanical aggression, require a new perspective.
The odontoblasts are the first line of defense and are involved in the initiation, development, and maintenance of the pulp im­mune and inflammatory responses to dentin-invading pathogens (32).
Inflammation of the dental pulp is associated with the release of a wide variety of highly oxidative molecules known as reactive oxygen spe­cies (ROS) (33, 34). Host cells release these molecules during inflammatory processes (35). Excess production of ROS contributes to the pathogenesis of many diseases involving inflammation (36) and renders tissue susceptible to oxidative damage (37). To avoid excessive oxidative tissue damage caused by the cumulative load of ROS, their concentrations are controlled by various cellular defense mechanisms including antioxidant enzymes such as catalase, gluta­thione peroxidase, and SOD (35). More specifically, previous studies demonstrated an increase in the enzymatic activity of Cu/Zn SODs in in­flamed pulp when compared with healthy pulp (33). Therefore, we hy­pothesize that the increased concentration of Cu and Zn we observed in the present study within the carious dentin and the pulp calcifications might reflect the increased antioxidative action of Cu/Zn SOD, which was probably secreted by odontoblasts or other local cells to control the oxidative state in the inflamed area.
We propose the following model of the pulpal mineralization mechanism.
We suppose that pulp cells have the ability to mineralize at a basic level, but under physiological conditions this property would be inhibited. However, in an oxidative state promoted by repeated mild injury, odontoblasts (or other local cells) secrete Cu/Zn SOD and trans­mit a signal to the pulpal cells. In this context, pathophysiological inter­actions between odontoblasts and pulpal cells would release the inhibition of mineralization, resulting in calcification of pulp tissue.

## **Conclusions**


In this study we characterized the ultrastructure of pulp stones, identified the apatite phase, and demonstrated the presence of heavy chemical elements in the mineralized tissue. Challenged pulpal cells produce unstructured, mineralized matrices evidenced by abnor­mally high levels of Zn and Cu. We hypothesize that the presence of high concentrations of Cu and Zn in pulp stones, which are not observed in physiological dentin, may be related to increased SOD enzyme activity, and that pulp stones appear in an inflammatory context. Under these conditions of oxidative stress, inhibition of mineralization in pulp cells would be lifted, leading to calcification of the pulp.
Acknowledgments *Fleur Beres is financially supported with a CIFRE national grant (2014-0428). The SU-70 Hitachi SEM-FEG inslrumenl.alion was provided by the 1MPCFR2482 (Institut desMateriaux de Paris Centre) and financially supported by the C'Nano projects of the Region Ile-de-France.* *The authors deny any conflicts of interest related to this study.*

## **References**
 1. Magloirc H, Romcas A, Mclin M, ct al. Molecular regulation of odontoblast activity under dentin injury. Adv Dent Res 2001;15:46-50.
2. Couve E. Ultrastructural changes during the life cycle of human ontoblasts. Arch Oral Biol 1986;31:643-51.
3. Simon S, Smith AJ, Lumley PJ, et al. Molecular characterization of ung and mature odontoblasts. Bone 2009;45:693-703.
4. Goldberg M, Smith AJ. Cells and extracellular matrices of dentin and lp: a biolog­ical basis for repair and tissue engineering. Crit Rev O Biol Med 2004;15:13-27.
5. Moss-Salentijin L, Hendricks-Klyvert MS. Calcified structures in the man dental pulps. J Endod 1988;14:184-9.
6. Chandler NP, Pitt Ford TR, Monteith BD. Coronal pulp size in molars: study of bitewing radiographs. Int Endod J 2003;36:757-63.
7. Arys A, Philippart C, Dourov N. Microradiography and light croscopy of miner­alization in the pulp of undemineralized human p ary molars. J Oral Pathol Med 1993;22:49-53.
8. Luukko K, Kettunen P, Fristad I, et al. Structure and functions of e dentin-pulp complex. In: Cohen S, Burns RC, eds. *Pathways of t Pulp.* 10th ed. St Louis: Mosby;; 2011:494-7.
9. Kannan S, Kannepady SK, Muthu K, et al. Radiographic assessment of e prevalence of pulp stones in Malaysians. J Endod 2015;41:333-7.
10. Johnson PL, Bevelander G. Histogenesis and histochemistry of pulpal lcification. J Dent Res 1956;35:714-22.
11. Sayegh FS, Reed AJ. Calcification in the dental pulp. Oral Surg Oral d Oral Pathol 1968;25:873-82.
12. Mjör IA, Pindborg JJ. *Histology of the Human Tooth.* Copenhagen: nksgaard; 1973:61-2.
13- Trowbridge HO, Tewart JCB, Shapiro IM. Assessment of indurated, diffusely calcified human dental pulp. In: *Proceedings of the
International Conference of Dentin/ Pulp Complex.* Tokyo: Quintessence
Pubfishing; 1996:297.
14. Goga R, Chandler NP, Oginni AO. Pulp stones: a review. Int Endod J 08;4l: 457-68.
15. Dessombz A, Lignon G, Picaut L, et al. Mineral studies in enamel, an emplary model system at the interface between physics, chemistry a medical sciences. C R Chim 2015; [ht //dx.doi.org/10.10l6Zj.crci.2015.03.009](http://dx.doi.org/10.10l6/j.crci.2015.03.009).
16. Dessombz A, Bazin D, Dumas P, et al. Shedding light on the chemical versity of ectopic calcifications in kidney tissues: diagnostic a research aspects. PLoS One 201 l;6:e28007.
17. Tomazic BB, Edwards WD, Schoen IJ- Physiochemical characterization natural and bioprosthetic heart valve calcific deposits: i ications for prevention. Ann Thorac Surg 1995;60:S322-7.
18. Zavgorodniy AV, Rohanizadeh R, Bulcock S, et al. Ultrastructural servations and growth of occluding crystals in carious dentin.
 Acta Biomater 2008;4:1427-39- 19- Stock SR, Deymier-Black AC, Veis A, et al. Bovine and equine peritubular and inter­tubular dentin. Acta Biomater 2014;10:3969-77.
20. Xue J, Zhang L, Zou L, et al. High-resolution X-ray microdiffraction alysis of nat­ural teeth. J Synch Rad 2008;15:235-8.
21. Harris HH, Vogt S, Eastgate H, et al. A link between copper and ntal caries in hu­man teeth identified by X-ray fluorescence e ental mapping. J Biol Inorg Chem 2008;13:303-6.
22. Sole VA, Papillon E, Cotte M, et al. A multiplatform code for the alysis of energy- dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectra.
 Spectrochim Acta Part B 2007;62:63-8.
23. Schroeder HA, Tipton IH, Nason AP. Trace metals in man: strontium d barium. J Chronic Dis 1972;25:491-517.
24. Ranjitkar S, Taylor JA, Townsend GC. A radiographic assessment of e prevalence of pulp stones in Australians. Aust Dent J 2 ;47:36-40.
25. Kansu O, Ozbek M, Avcu N, et al. The prevalence of carotid artery lcification on the panoramic radiographs of patients with renal d ase. Dentomaxillofac Radiol 2005; 34:16-9.
26. Deymier-Black AC, Veis A, Cai Z, et al. Crystallographic texture and emental compo­sition mapped in bovine root dentin at the 200 nm l l. Scanning 2014;36:231-40.
27. Gomez S, Rizzo R, Pozzi-Mucclli M, ct al. Zinc mapping in bone ssues by histo­chemistry and synchrotron radiation-induced X-ray e sion: correlation with the distribution of alkaline phosphatase.
 Bone 1999;25:33-8.
28. Ren F, Xin R, Ge X, et al. Characterization and structural analysis zinc-substituted hydroxyapatites. Acta Biomater 2009;5:3141-9.
29. Dessombz A, Nguyen C, Ea HK, et al. Combining uX-ray uorescence, XANES and gXRD to shed light on Zn2+ cations in c ilage and meniscus calcifications. J Trace Elem Med Biol 201 7:326-33.
30. Sharif R, Thomas P, Zalewski P, Fenech M. The role of zinc in nomic stability. Mutat Res 2012;733:111-21.
31. Love RM, Jenkinson HF. Invasion of dentinal tubules by oral cteria. Crit Rev Oral Biol Med 2002;13:171-83.
32. Farges JC, Keller JF, Carrouel F, et al. Odontoblasts in the dental lp immune response. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 2009;312B:425-36.
33- Baumgardner KR, Sulfaro MA. The anti-inflammatory effects of human recombi­nant copper-zinc superoxide dismutase on pulp inflammation. J
Endod 2001; 27:190-5.
34. Duncan HF, Smith AJ, Fleming GJP, et al. HDACi cellular effects, portunities for restorative dentistry. J Dent Res 2011;90:1377-88.
35. Freeman BA, Crapo JD. Biology of disease: free radicals and tissue jury. Lab Invest 1982;47:412-26.
36. Nussler AK, Billiar TR. Inflammation, immunoregulation, and ducible nitric oxide. J Leukoc Biol 1993;54:171-8.
37. Cerutti PA. Prooxidant states and tumor promotion. Science 85;227:375-81.
