0099-2399-83/0912-0554/\$02.00/0 JOURNAL OF ENDODONTICS
Copyright 9 1983 bythe American Association of Endodontits
Epithelially Induced Denticles in the Pulps of Recently Erupted,
Noncarious Human Premolars
Letty Moss-Salentijn, DDS,PhD,and Marlene Hendricks Klyvert, EdD
Eighty-five maxillary and 90 mandibular newly erupted, noncarious premolars from patients ages 11 to 15 were studied. All teeth were radiographed in mesiodistal and buccolingual projections to es­tablish the presence of calcified bodies in the dental pulps. Of the premolars, 25.8% of the maxillary and 25.5% of the mandibular contained pulpal calcifi­cations. Most were found in the radicular pulp near the apex. A slightly higher percentage of coronal calcified bodies and a significantly lower percent­age of radicular calcified bodies was found in teeth whose roots were completed.
Selected specimens with radiographic evidence of calcification were sectioned serially for histolog­ical study. Two principal types of calcified bodies were found: epithelially induced denticles and pulp stones formed around amorphous cores of calcified pulp tissue.
Six denticles were selected for graphic, three­dimensional reconstruction, which demonstrated that denticles are initially thimble-shaped, with the open end facing apically. Later they become com­plete dentin shells around a central cavity. The improper classification of true and false denticles is discussed.
For over a century, reports have appeared in the dental literature on the subject of calcified bodies in the dental pulp. Although the earlier descriptions were rather anecdotal (1-3), several later studies have provided more extensive data on the incidence, loca­tion, and histological nature of pulpal calcifications in large samples of human teeth (4-9).
The findings of those studies suggest that several etiological factors may be involved in the development of calcified bodies in the pulp, specifically, changes in the pulp tissue as a result of aging, changes due to chronic irritations of pulp tissue, and inductive inter­actions between the cells of the epithelial root sheath and the cells of the dental papilla (10-15). However, the latter mechanism has not been universally ac­cepted (14) and no adequate developmental descrip­tions are given in the literature.
The present study provides radiographic and his­tological data about the incidence, location, and mor­phology of calcified bodies in the pulps of newly erupted human premolars, which suggest that epithe- lially induced calcified bodies (here defined as *denti­cles)* indeed do exist. It also provides the first three­dimensional, graphic reconstructions of such denti­cles, illustrating their characteristic morphology at some stages of their development.

## **Materials and Methods**


A total of 175 (85 maxillary and 90 mandibular) newly erupted, noncarious human premolars were obtained for this study. The premolars had been ex­tracted for orthodontic reasons. The ages of the pa­tients ranged from 11 to 15 yr.
Radiographs were prepared of all of the teeth in both mesiodistal and buccolingual projections, using a dental X-ray machine with a 16-inch cone. The Kodak DF 57 (double packet) films were exposed at 50 kVp, 15 mA, and 75 imp and processed in an automatic processor at 68\~ for 3.5 min.
All radiographs were reviewed by both investigators independently on two separate occasions. A calcified body was considered to be present in the dental pulp if it had been observed four times or three of four times.
Furthermore, the possibility that a calcified body might be present was noted if two findings were positive and two negative.
Based on the locations of the calcified bodies and the degree of completion of the roots, subgroups were established and eight representative teeth were se­lected for further histological study and graphic re­constructions. The specimens, which had been fixed previously in 10% formalin, were decalcified in 5% formic acid, embedded in paraffin, and routinely sec­tioned and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. The serial sections were cut in a plane perpendicular to the long axis of the tooth.
Tracings were prepared of all denticle-containing sections, at standard magnifications, with the aid of a projection microscope. The outlines of the traced den­ticles were retraced on the digitizing tablet of a Zeiss
Videoplan microcomputer, using the internal and ex-
Epithelially Induced Denticles 555 ternal dentin outlines of the tooth as registration land­marks.
Graphic three-dimensional reconstructions were prepared of a total of six selected denticles with the aid of a program designed to create three-dimensional impressions from serial sections. This program also permitted rotations of the graphically reconstructed denticles so that they could be studied from all sides.

## **Results**


The principal *radiographic* findings of this study are summarized in
Tables 1 and 2. The incidence of radiographically distinct calcified bodies in the pulps was closely similar for maxillary and mandibular pre­molars: 25.8 and 25.5%, respectively (37.6 and 35.5% if pulps with possible calcifications were in­cluded). The majority of these calcified bodies was found in the radicular pulps and preferentially in the apical halves of these pulps (Fig. 1).
If the stage of root development was taken into account, the percentages of teeth with calcified bodies in the coronal pulp were slightly higher after root completion than before. In contrast, significantly fewer calcified bodes were found in the radicular pulps after root completion than before.
*Histologically,* two distinctly different types of cal­cified bodies were observed, here identified as pulp stones and denticles.
In *this* material, the first type, the pulp stone, con­sisted of a mixture of tubular dentin (usually more centrally located) and atubular, calcified tissue (usu­ally more peripherally located). These tissues sur­rounded one or several dense, irregularly calcified, basophilic cores. Pulp stones were found in coronal as well as in radicular pulp tissue. They were fre­quently found in association with diffuse calcification of the surrounding pulp tissue (Fig. 2). They will not be described in more detail here.
The second type, the denticle, consisted of a shell of tubular dentin which surrounded a central cavity filled with cell remnants. In the somewhat older den­ticles, these cell remnants could not be readily iden­tified. However, during the earlier developmental stages, the enclosed cell remnants resembled the isolated epithelial remnants that were found occasion­ally in the pulp tissue near the denticles (Fig. 3).
This finding and the fact that odontoblasts were located at the periphery of each denticle suggested that these calcified bodies had been epithelially induced (Figs. 3 to 5). In teeth whose root development was not com­pleted, the denticles nearest the apical end had a rather characteristic thimble shape with the open end facing apically (Fig. 6, A to C).
The diameter of the central cavity varied between 20 and 50 #m. The thickness of the dentin shell was 25 to 90/\~m, while the heights of the denticles varied between 180 and 260/\~m. In this material, denticles were found exclusively in the radicular pulp, not in the coronal pulp.
Free denticles were abundant in teeth whose root development was not complete.
In teeth with more advanced or completed root development, most denticles were attached or em­bedded in the dentin wall, but remained recognizable by their central cavities and their general outlines (Fig.
7). A few denticles remained free in the central pulps of these more mature teeth (Fig. 8). Such denticles, however, no longer were thimble shaped. A complete dentin shell surrounded the central cavity (Fig. 6D), and the enclosed epithelial cells had undergone de­generation. In some free denticles, the initial tubular dentin shell was partially or completely surrounded by layers of atubular, calcified tissue. The lumina of the dentinal tubules were narrower than in the thimble­shaped denticles.
In this relatively small sample of histologically stud­ied pulps of teeth with radiographic evidence of pulpal calcification, a total of 35 pulp stones and 24 denticles were observed in serial section. In the coronal pulps only pulp stones were seen, surrounded by multiple
 \* A, maxillary premolars; B, mandibular premolars; a, prior to root completion; b, after root completion.
t The numbers without parentheses represent positive findings. The numbers enclosed in the parentheses represent both positive and possible findings. In some cases calcifi­cations were seen in both coronal and radicular pulps of the same teeth. Such teeth are therefore listed in both categories.
 \* A, maxillary premolars; B, mandibular premolars.
t The numbers without parentheses represent positive findings. The numbers enclosed in the parentheses represent the totals of both positive and \"possible\" findings. In some cases calcifications were seen in both coronal and redicular pulps of the same teeth. Such teeth are therefore listed in both categories.
small foci of diffuse calcification. In the radicular pulps it was possible to find either pulp stones and denticles within the same pulp, or pulp stones alone, or denti-cles alone. A comparison between the number of calcified structures found radiographically and the number found histologically in the same tooth suggested that, with the particular film and exposure factors that were **
## **Discussion**
Various studies have reported on the incidence of calcifications in human dental pulps. The values vary from a low of 8% (7, 8) to a high of 90% (4, 8). Generally, it appears that the incidence is higher in older teeth (4, 8) and in carious and/or operated teeth (5, 7-9).
The published values on the incidence of pulpal calcifications in young, noncarious teeth, all based on histological studies, are 8 (7, 8), 19.5 (6), 52 (5), and 66% (4). These different values are most likely due to the differences in the composition of the samples that were studied. The present sample consisted of pos- showed that calcified bodies with a diameter smaller than 200 /\~m could not be seen in the radiographs. With this constraint, our incidence figures agree more closely with the higher (4, 5) than with the lower (6-8) values reported in the literature. This may reflect the fact that these \"orthodontic\" premolars constitute a somewhat unique sample, for reasons discussed be­low.
The small increase in coronal pulp calcifications in the slightly older teeth of this sample may be explained as a simple result of aging, whereby possible earlier existing calcifications attained a large enough diame­ter to be detected radiographically. The decrease in the incidence of radicular pulp calcifications in the slightly older teeth appeared to be due largely to the incorporation of many of the existing pulp stones and denticles in the root dentin, transforming them from free into embedded structures. In addition, it is also possible that the increased thickness of the root dentin in older teeth caused an attenuation of the
X-ray beam sufficient to mask smaller calcified structures in the pulp.
The particularly low kV, which is beyond clinical tolerance, was utilized by us to obtain optimal contrast for the detection of pulpal calcifications (17). This, and the fact that most calcifications occur near the apex, explains why many of these calcified bodies are not seen clinically.
Most recent studies on the development of calcified bodies in the pulp have dealt with the structures referred to by us as pulp stones (18-20).
Pulp stones form around foci of calcifying pulp tissue components (collagen fibrils, necrotic cell remnants, ground sub­stance). The mineral phase of the pulp stones appears to be more like that of bone than of dentin (20). Frequently, pulps that contain one or more pulp stones exhibit diffuse calcification as well.
The structures referred to by us as denticles have been described in the older literature as \"canalized\" denticles (10). The present study clarifies the shapes of these structures. Central to the identification of the denticles is their noncalcified cavity. The fact that epithelial remnants are present in these cavities and that tubular dentin with, a peripheral layer of odonto­blasts directly surrounds these remnants suggests that denticles form as the result of inductive interac­tions between cell remnants of the epithelial root sheath and cells of the immature dental pulp.
In the thimble-shaped denticles, the open end al­ways faced apically. It is therefore reasonable to as­sume that odontoblast differentiation proceeds in an occlusoapical direction during the formation of these structures. If the development of the denticle contin­ues undisturbed, the dentin shell is completed sub­sequently by dentin deposition at the apical end.
Stenvik and MjSr (21) described the occurrence of denticles following experimental intrusion of human premolars that were slated for orthodontic extraction. They noted the presence of both denticles and pulp stones in the apical areas of the pulps of control and experimental teeth, with evidence of a substantial increase in the numbers of denticles after experimen­tal intrusion of the teeth. The histological appearance of the denticles described by these authors was similar to the appearance of the structures observed by us and complements the description of the develop­mental sequence suggested by us. However, no fur­ther three-dimensional information was provided.
It should be emphasized that in both the present study and in the study of Stenvik and MjOr (21), a population of orthodontic premolars has been used. It is possible that delays occur in the normal develop­ment and eruption of these teeth, which might cause an increased incidence in the formation of denticles, pulp stones, or both. This suggestion is strengthened by an incidental observation of what appears to be a denticle in the pulp of a rat incisor with arrested eruption (22). Since pulpal calcifications are not nor­mally found in rat incisors, this finding may have significance in the interpretation of the present data.
Additional research on premolars, with accurate indi­vidual case histories, and on samples of different teeth is needed to provide further insight. Such studies are currently under way.
In reviewing the available data, it appears that den­ticle formation may be limited in *time* to the period of root formation and in *location* to the radicular pulp and the furcation areas of molariform teeth (unpub­lished data). The location and appearance of the epi­thelial remnants found in the radicular pulps of human premolars in this study and in the study of Stenvik and Mj6r (21) suggest that these cell clusters are irregular, pulpally oriented off-shoots of the root sheath, which have lost contact with the parent epithelium (as veri­fied in serial sections). In contrast to the \"postinteractive\" epithelial remnants of Malassez, these cells are probably \"preinteractive\" at the time they lose continuity with the root sheath. The epithelial cells may be able to engage in inductive interactions with responsive mesenchymal cells for a limited period only, since early developmental stages of denticle formation were found consistently just occlusal to the location of the epithelial diaphragm.
It has been customary to classify calcified bodies in the pulp as either \"true\" or \"false,\" based on their histological composition.
Calcified bodies which con­tain tubular dentin have been described as \"true denticles,\" while the structures composed of atubular calcified tissue have been described as \"false denti­cles.\" For many investigators this distinction implied that the genesis of the two types of calcified bodies differed: true denticles might have formed as the result of inductive interactions whereas false denticles might have formed around foci of calcified pulp tissue. Nu­merous objections against this classification have been made, but it continues to be used in most stan­dard textbooks of dental histology.
In our material most of the calcified bodies were composed of a combination of tubular dentin and atubular calcified material. Tubular dentin was always present in epithelially induced denticles, but it was also regularly present in the pulp stones, which formed initially around calcified foci. The presence of tubular dentin in a calcified body did not *necessarily* indicate that the calcified body was formed as the result of an inductive interaction. However, denticles invariably possessed a characteristic central cavity, which was present in all developmental stages studied here, while the pulp stones were compact masses of calci­fied tissue.
Therefore, it seems more appropriate to make a distinction between calcified bodies in the pulp ac­cording to their mode of genesis, as was done in this study: denticles, which form after an inductive inter­action between epithelium and pulp tissue, versus pulp stones, which form around foci of calcified pulp components. The former may reflect a slight disturb­ance in the normal developmental sequence of root formation, which, although it remains as yet imper­fectly understood, does not appear to have a major physiological impact on the pulp tissue.
The latter may reflect degenerative changes of the pulp tissue, even at an early age, which tend to increase in number and severity as the individual grows older.
The response of the surrounding pulp tissue to an inductive stimulus appears to be age dependent. It is a common finding that pulp stones, which develop in older teeth, consist entirely of atubular dentin.
Calci­fied bodies (denticles and pulp stones), which are initially composed of tubular dentin, tend to become surrounded by atubular dentin with age.
The formation of tubular dentin in either type of calcified body in younger pulps appears to reflect the ability of the cells in the immature pulp tissue to undergo differentiation into odontoblasts for a limited period of time, provided the proper inductive stimulus is received, whether this stimulus originates from ep­ithelial cells or not.
Therefore, the use of the termi­nology true and false denticles no longer appears to have any validity.

## **References**
 1. Salter SJA. Dental pathology and surgery. New York: William Wood & Co, 1875.
2. B6decker CF. Anatomy and pathology of the teeth. Philadelphia: SS White Dental Manufacturing Co, 1894.
3. Preiswerk G. Atlas and textbook of dentistry, including diseases of the mouth. Warren GW, ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders Co, 1906.
4. Hill TJ, Pathology of the dental pulp, J Am Dent Assoc 1934;21:820- 44.
5. James VE. Early pulpal calcifications of permanent teeth of young individuals \[abstract\]. J Dent Res 1958;37:973.
6. Langeland K, Langeland LK. Histologic study of 155 impacted teeth.
 Odont Tidskr 1965;73:527-50.
7. Hall DC. Pulpal calcifications-a pathological process? In: Symons NBB, ed. Dentine and pulp. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1968.
8. Sayegh FS, Reed AJ. Calcification in the dental pulp. Oral Surg 1968;25:873-82.
9. Sundell JR, Stanley HR, White CL. The relationship of coronal pulp stone formation to experimental operative procedures. Oral Surg 1968;25:579-89.
10. Euler H. Sekundare Odontoblastenbildung. Dtsch Monatschr Zahn- heilk 1927;45:488-94.
11. Fridrichovsky H. Zur Histologie der Dentikel. Z Stomatol 1927;25:124-57.
12. Orban B. Dental histology and embryology. Chicago: Rogers Printing Co, 1928.
13. Seltzer S, Bender IS. The dental pulp. Biological considerations in dental procedures. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1965.
14. Baume LJ. The biology of pulp and dentine. A historic, terminologic- taxonomic, histologic-biochemical, embryonic and clinical survey.
 Mono­graphs in oral science. Vol. 8. Meyers HM, ed. Basel: S Karger, 1980.
15. Mj6r IA. Reaction patterns in human teeth. Boca Raton, FL: CRC
Press Inc, 1983.
16. Early PJ, Razzak MA, Dodee DB. Textbook of nuclear medicine technology. 3rd ed. St. Louis: CV Mosby, 1979.
17. Meredith WJ, Massey JB. Fundamental physics of radiology. 2nd ed.
 Bristol: John Wright and Sons, 1972.
18. Appleton J, Williams MJR. Ultrastructural observations on the calci­fication of human dental pulp. Calcif Tissue Res 1973;11:222-37.
19. Pla\~kova A, Vahi J. Ultrastructure of mineralizations in the human pulp. Caries Res 1974;8:172-80.
20. Aoba T, Ebisu S, Yagi T. A study of the mineral phase of pulp calcifications. J Oral Pathol 1980;9:129-36.
21. StenvikA, Mj6r IA. Epithelial remnants and denticle formation in the human dental pulp. Acta Odontol Scand 1970;28:721-28.
22. Marina V. Pulp stones in the rat incisor. J Dent Res 1972;51:1678.